we lose 200 000 tons of soil every hour
every hour every hour we lose we lose a
country the size of nicaragua or north
korea of soil every year
we have 60 harvests left according to
the u.n
before we run out of soil and can't grow
food no soil no food no humans
hey everybody welcome to health theory
today's guest is dr mark hyman a giant
in the health and wellness space he's
not only written 11 number one new york
times bestselling books on a wide range
of health related topics but he's also
the director of functional medicine at
the world renowned cleveland clinic
additionally he's consulted for the
surgeon general and testified before
congress on the issues of health care
reform and functional medicine and
further proving that healthy living
apparently makes you essentially
superhuman he also founded and serves as
the medical director of the ultra
wellness center acts as the chairman of
the board for the institute for
functional medicine and somehow has time
to be the medical editor of the
huffington post and quite honestly all
of that is just the tip of a very large
iceberg of incredible accomplishments
it really is crazy dude doing the
research on you like seeing how many
things you're involved in and it all
seems to revolve around a couple of core
things
one of them being shocking we'll get to
that one in a minute around buddhism and
connection and love and all that which i
was really blown away by yeah but the
the core notion of the body as ecosystem
yeah talk to me about that what does
that mean well you know i went to
medical school and we learned about the
body as a bunch of separate parts there
and your cardiovascular system your gi
system your nervous system
and on and on and there's all these
specialties that are all siloed and you
go to the doctor and you have a whole
bunch of different symptoms and when you
basically ask about well you go to the
cardiologist well i got this rash oh
don't talk to me about that i won't go
to the dermatologist or you feel like a
little depressed i'll go to
psychiatrists and you've got a doctor
for every inch of you and the truth is
the body is one ecosystem and i
discovered this by myself becoming
really really sick and having to reverse
engineer my way to health and i
discovered this model of thinking that
was basically a systems model
and it helped me to understand the root
cause of disease and how the body works
together and everything is connected
like a web so when you pull on the right
strings you don't have to treat
everything separately with multiple
medications you can get to the root
cause and everything goes away
now one thing so having lived through
this myself with my wife and seeing how
complicated it becomes when you start
thinking of the body as an ecosystem
because she's had
massive
microbiome issues digestive trouble
and where it all starts right so we
started trying to use traditional
western medicine so it was like okay
what is this how do you
and maybe you walking us through what
you did in your own life because i know
that you ran into a very catastrophic
health problem how do you begin to
figure out what is the root cause
and then actually take steps to repair
so functional medicine is basically a
methodology it's a an operating system
it's a way of thinking differently about
disease and it's
becoming a medical detective to connect
the dots between all these disparate
things and so i basically look at a
person's story and try to get a sense of
how they got to where they are so for
your wife i'd want to know oh was she
born by c-section or vaginal birth was
she did you go all the way back to that
bottle fed or breastfed did she take
early antibiotics did she have
a gastroenteritis or was she traveling a
foreign country or something happened
where
her gut didn't develop properly
and then i want to know what other
exposure she's had and whether she's
exposed to toxins heavy metals so i ask
a lot of questions i want to know
everything she eats exactly her
lifestyle what she does how she sleeps
exercises so i'm looking at whether the
body is imbalanced in these systems so
functional medicine has a map we call it
the matrix okay and essentially we look
at you know you know your genetics and
triggering factors we look at your
lifestyle you know give me an example of
trigger in fact so were you exposed to a
moldy house like i got really sick
living in a multi-house i lived in china
got exposed to mercury that's a
triggering factor right you could have
got lyme disease you could have uh eaten
bad sushi and got something you know so
all that is relevant as a triggering
factor but then there might be
predisposing factors like
she had a gut that wasn't so great in
the first place she might have had you
know again born by c-section not a
bottle bottle fed not not um taking
antibiotics and then we see where where
are things are in or out of balance when
you have too much of the bad stuff and
not enough the good stuff that your body
needs you know
sleep exercise nutrition relationships
connection love meaning all that stuff
when you have too much of the bad stuff
none of the good stuff your body breaks
down so we look at these seven systems
and how they're in balance or how to
balance and that relates to all disease
so there's your gut and they're all
connected they're not really separate
they're like a web but we just break
them out for the purposes of thinking
about them right so there's the gut and
digestion the microbiome there's your
immune system we call it defense and
repair your energy system how you make
energy from oxygen and and food your
detoxification system how you process
your metabolic toxins environmental
toxins your transport system which is
circulation lymphatic circulation your
communication system which is hormones
neurotransmitters messenger molecules
that communicate and then your
structural system which is everything
from your biomechanical skill structure
down to the structure of your cell
membranes and all those are influencing
how you feel at any moment influencing
whether you're getting more disease or
less disease so when your gut breaks
down the gut is really the central thing
because when your gut breaks down
everything breaks down because the
microbiome is this extraordinary
ecosystem of bugs within you that
control a lot of what happens in your
body and when they're out of balance you
not only have digestive symptoms but you
can have everything from dementia to
cancer to heart disease to diabetes
to
autoimmune diseases and lots more
so i know you've talked a lot about the
need for coaches and getting a health
and wellness coach involved in your life
if somebody right now is at home
listening so now they understand the
seven systems that are working together
um
how can they begin to diagnose
what's going on are there like simple
questions that they can ask themselves
so like in lisa's case we sort of backed
into
there are probably several problems
including um
bordering on an eating disorder when she
was younger yeah and then it'll mess up
your system yeah for sure and then a lot
of antibiotics and the threshold event
um ended up being she just got some sort
of bug of some kind um but it was
because she had taken antibiotics i mean
a lot she was taking antibiotics like
four or five times a year for years
she had chronic chest infections right
and so
then she hits this bug whatever here in
l.a yeah yeah and that was a tipping
point that's the triggering factor yeah
so the whole the whole point of
functional medicine is about creating
health you know regular medicine is
about diagnosing and treating disease i
don't really care what disease you have
i don't know how do we create health how
do you get the best
microbiome on the planet how do you
create a healthy inner garden what do
you have to do to do that how do you
diagnose what's out of balance there and
get rid of the bad bugs and then put in
the good bugs but it's not just as
simple as taking probiotics you know i
actually had a do you think probiotics
work
they they're like tourists you know they
come through the economy they affect you
know the things a little bit but they're
not they don't stick around that long so
you have to keep taking them which is
not bad necessarily but what what's
really extraordinary is that i recently
developed ulcerative colitis as a result
of taking an antibiotic for a bad tooth
i had a tooth infection
that led to c diff which is a deathly
intestinal infection that then spiraled
into colitis
and you know doing what i do i was like
okay well this is kind of messed up i
got to rebuild my gut and i
you know
took all the things i knew and i put
together this cocktail of stuff and
there was one particular bug called
akkermansia
which is really important to regulate
immune function and cardiovascular
health and lots of things and it
protects the biofilm it restabilizes
your gut
and
this is all really relatively new
research if you have if you have low
levels of this for example if you get
those new checkpoint inhibitors that are
anti-cancer drugs that are immunotherapy
they don't work checkpoint inhibitors
it's an immunotherapy drug which
activates your immune system okay
to kill the cancer and this is like a
100 like if it works you're cured you
have melanoma like jimmy carter that's
stage four melanoma you're gonna be dead
in a few months you take this drug
you're cured and he's still building
houses at 99 years old or something so
that's these are amazing drugs but they
don't work on everybody and turns out if
you don't have a healthy microbiome they
don't work
so all this research is going on i
started looking and i realized you know
what
taking prebiotics is good take which is
fiber feed the good bugs taking
probiotics is good but they also like
polyphenols which are these
extraordinary compounds in colorful
fruits and vegetables that the
microbiome needs to grow and so think
about creating healthy soil you can put
all kinds of chemicals on right
fertilizers and this and you have a
damaged soil it doesn't really grow good
food but if you have a healthy
you know rich soil you can you can
create health and so we put in all these
things like cranberry pomegranate green
tea
and they are really great for acromancy
okay and then i use prebiotics fiber
like acacia fiber to help feed the good
bugs and i also use a form of colostrum
which is immunoglobulin so it's like
passive immunity helps regulate the
immune system i use a little collagen
peptides i took some something called
probuturate which is a product that
helps with
fats in the gut and this is a general
cocktail that i take it's a shake take
it every morning and within three weeks
my ulcer class was gone like gone and
now i'm like best poops in my life
so that's uh that's very interesting so
first we had to kill the c diff then we
have our magical cocktail what if
somebody has sibo is would you recommend
doing a round of antibiotics to kill the
sibo first yeah sibo for everybody's
listening doesn't know what that is it's
basically where the bugs
migrate up into your small intestine and
from your large intestine so you
normally should have a sterile upper gut
and your lower gut your colon is where
your poop is and your bad bugs are or
good bugs
when they migrate up that's when you get
bloating distension i call it food baby
you feel you know like every time you
eat you just feel bloated and full after
that's often a sign of bacterial
overgrowth really common uh so you can
you have to figure out why it's
happening because if you just treat it
without knowing that it can come back
that's interesting why would it happen
well it can happen because you have
motility issues you have low magnesium
you have a parasite you know there may
be some reasons why you could have
obesia which is a tick infection so you
have to figure all that out but then
you can take herbs or you can take
special antibiotics that are only in the
gut
and i also use antifungals that clear
out the bad bugs it's kind of called the
weeding seeding and feeding program you
weed out the bad bugs and you see it
with good bugs and you're feeding with
all this good stuff
okay so if we're doing weeding seeding
and feeding
what do you use to identify what the
current state of your microbiome is is
there a particular test that you
recommend yes there's so many tests out
there but clinically i think the most
useful one i've been doing this for 30
years and it's it's called gifx from a
lab called genova and it looks at not
just the microbiome
from the measuring the bacteria because
you can do that you can measure with new
you know dna testing which is really
actually rna testing for bugs you can
actually measure all the bugs in there
but then what does it mean how
clinically relevant is it so i i look at
the function of the gut are there are
there the products for example in there
that are made by healthy bugs called
short chain fats if they're low
you know that there's no good fats and
that's the fuel for the colon i want to
look at you are your digestive enzymes
working are you absorbing food properly
is there inflammation in your gut what's
your immune system doing in your gut
what is growing in your gut you have a
parasite or bad bugs so i look at all
that and then i can come up with a sense
of what's going on and often people have
leaky gut and food sensitivities and
this vicious cycle of these bad bugs and
food sensitivities and it's what makes
so many people sick
how long would you expect
when done well how long would you expect
this repair protocol to take if you
combine it with diet you also have to
eliminate the things that are in your
diet that are driving gut problems right
because
think about it you're eating pounds of
food every day
and that is what's landing in your gut
and feeding your bugs and if you're
eating processed food sugar starch bad
fats
it's going to be a problem you're not
going to get better so you need a whole
foods diet i call it the pecan diet
which is kind of a joke but it's like
you know less extreme more inclusive but
whole foods focusing on quality not so
much worrying about quantity
and and sometimes eliminating things
like gluten and dairy and and other
things that can be trigger food
sensitivities and combined with the diet
and this protocol within a few weeks
people start to feel significantly
better
and then it takes about three months to
really kind of reset the whole thing
when somebody has a stubborn problem
like lisa is insanely disciplined if you
tell her to do something she's gonna do
it for sure
her diet is clean in fact i would
probably consider that one of the things
that
became her problem was it was too
restricted too restrictive so and then
once the sibo kicked in once she
encountered the parasite and had the
threshold event it's like
the the weed seed and feed thing i don't
know that we've ever gotten
perfect like is there
um is there any particular thing that
creates a stubborn problem when when the
person is being disciplined but it
continues absolutely
you know
almost 30 years ago i had another
problem which was mercury poisoning
and that messed up my gut big time and i
i got a triggering event which was some
bug i picked up somewhere in a lake in
maine
and then my tire got broke down and i
literally had diarrhea bloating pain for
years whoa and a whole and i developed
chronic fatigue syndrome my old system
broke down and it wasn't until i got rid
of the mercury that my gut sorted out
so she has mercury poisoning if she's
mold toxic if she has a tick infection
some underlying thing
it can impede people getting fully
better yeah
so now let's say that we've identified
the problem we've done the weeding
what should somebody be eating so
obviously in your new book
what the heck
you go into it's all whole food based
but there's obviously a lot of whole
foods in the world so what should people
be aiming at well here's the thing you
know there's so many diet wars
you know nutrition is often based on
ideology
uh not on good science and
there's so much conflicting information
and people are buffeted about by the
media one day that meat's bad then it's
good one day eggs are bad then they're
good then they're bad i mean it's just
it kind of makes people crazy and give
up and what a scientist doing and it's
just a mess right
but you know i've i've been studying
nutrition for 40 years and i've been not
only studying it in a book i've been
using food as medicine for 30 years as a
doctor
and i i'm humbled by it because i
realize everybody is different everybody
needs different
approaches based on their genetics their
preferences and so forth but
there are some common principles i call
them the pagan principles that are
universal that no one will argue with
and i you know i was sort of joking
because i was i was on a panel with a
friend of mine who was vegan it was a
cardiologist another guy was a paleo doc
and they were fighting and i was in the
middle
and i'm like well if you're a paleo and
you're vegan then i must be pagan and it
was like just kind of a goofy joke and
and i realized wait a minute they agree
on about everything except where you get
your protein from so they all agree that
we should be eating whole foods they all
agree we should meet any industrial
processed foods they all agree we should
uh be eating a ton of vegetables
lots of good fruit lots of nuts and
seeds lots of good fats everybody agrees
that
the things that are different are should
we have our protein from animals or from
beans and grains that's the only
difference and i thought you know well
not everybody has a problem with beans
and grains and not everybody has a
problem with animal protein in fact it
can be a very important source of food
for most people
the question is what right
what grains what beans what meat what
fish and so that's really what those
principles are about it's focusing on
quality so for example do you want to
eat a feedlot burger heck no right
because they're raised on grain for many
reasons one
they're they're raised in a way that is
inhumane for them they're raised on
foods that uh create you know bad
metabolic profiles in the animal so
you're eating a lot of inflammatory
stuff they feed them you know chicken
[__] they feed them
candy they feed them corn and then
there's how they grow the food for the
animals which creates massive
environmental destruction
you know loss of biodiversity in the
soils and animals
loss of water resources because of all
the irrigation the growth of crops for
the animals the deforestation that
results the destruction of our soil the
use of fertilizers pesticides the
fertilizers run off and destroy all
their rivers and lakes and oceans and
create dead zones the size of new
journey in the gulf of mexico that
killed 212 thousand metric tons of fish
a year
and there's 400 dead zones like that the
size of europe around the world that are
in coastal areas that are killing the
food supply for half a billion people
you know that's because of the
consequences of how we're growing our
food
and
not only that it's a giant source of
climate change for all those reasons
so nobody should be eating factory
farmed animals
on the other hand you look at
regenerative animals which means
regenerative means you you farm or grow
animals in a way that is bringing the
ecosystem back to health which is
restoring soils reducing water use
reducing or limiting fertilizer
pesticides herbicides and there was an
interesting analysis everybody's into
these plant-based burgers now and you
know i think yeah it's better that we
eat plants and that's great but what
plants should it be a highly industrial
product like impossible burger for
example
uh is gmo soy so it's grown in a way
that you're getting lots of glyphosate
which is not good for you it destroys
your gut your the food is grown in big
amount of crops intensively with
fertilizers pesticides herbicides
destroying the soil using up water and
so forth it's way better than a feedlot
beef but when you compare it this was
done by an independent life cycle
analysis company qantas that looked at
both impossible burger and a
regeneratively raised beef burger from
white oaks farms in i think missouri
and they found that you literally
had to eat one regeneratively raised
burger to offset the carbon emissions of
a
plant-based impossible burger to offset
it in other words the the soy burger
added three and a half kilos of carbon
environment the grass-fed burger took
out three and a half kilos of carbon
from the environment because soil
is the biggest carbon sink on the planet
it can hold three times the amount of
carbon in the entire atmosphere if we
took care of it and built organic matter
in the soil which only happens for the
use of animals right that dig and pee
and poo and move around and chew down
the grass and that builds soil and this
and that doesn't use fertilizer it
doesn't use pesticides it doesn't use
herbicides uses rain water so you're not
using eighteen hundred gallons for every
pound it's like it's called green water
and producing higher quality meat with
high levels of antioxidants high levels
of omega-3 fats better for the animals
and you're not destroying ecosystems
when you when you grow soy you're
destroying ecosystems you know you're
destroying the habitat of animals and
rabbits and mice and birds when you're
making these giant mega farms so i mean
probably eating a regenerative grass-fed
burger is probably the most vegan thing
you can do
so you know it's like and and i think
it's just you getting this false economy
like all meat is bad or only vegan or
you know oh you should only you know
you'd be paleo that it just doesn't make
sense right
that's really interesting the green
argument is um is fascinating seeing
sort of the the balancing out that's
going to happen between
whether there is some amount of farm
raised that's actually necessary i've
heard you talk about the topsoil before
and that that's actually something that
without animals you're going to erode
the soil and that in and of itself
causes some dramatic issues we lose 200
000 tons of soil every hour every hour
every hour we lose we lose a country the
size of nicaragua or north korea of soil
every year
we have 60 harvests left according to
the u.n
before we run out of soil and can't grow
food no soil no food no humans forget
climate change this is that sounds
relatively problematic and by actually
using the strategy of regenerative
agriculture we can draw down carbon not
add to the carbon in the environment
even if we stopped all fossil fuels
tomorrow we still would be screwed we
need strategies that draw down carbon
out of the environment and the food
system is the number one set of
solutions
let me ask you so even just for getting
anything ecological why
plants so that when you were saying
everybody agrees we should eat more
vegetables obviously i would say stephen
gundry probably doesn't agree that we
should eat more vegetables maybe if
there's certain yeah the right
vegetables do you have a take on that
like what's your vibe about lectins yeah
yeah okay so i think it's really
personalized and so for some people who
have serious illnesses getting off of
inflammatory foods including lectins can
be helpful
but you know look 60 of our diet is
ultra processed food
that's the first priority to have is get
people off that stuff don't restrict
vegetables you know because like unless
you're really sick and you want to try
it as a therapy fine but i'm really not
a you know a big fan of telling people
to not eat vegetables because i think
there's so much value in them and i
think if we actually have the problem of
restricting unnecessarily for people
it's it's not great well let's talk
about so
um what do you think about the carnivore
diet is there any logic there well you
know it's interesting i mean that you
know like jordan peterson's doing that
and his daughter did it to cure
autoimmune disease and yes if you are
really sick sometimes it can be
profoundly helpful i mean if you have
autoimmune disease if you have um
severe obesity i mean there can be real
benefits
but i again
you know we used to eat 800 species of
plants as hunter-gatherers we ate animal
products when we could find them
you know or hunt them and it was a part
of our diet it wasn't staple some
cultures like the plains indians like
the dakota
they lived mostly on buffalo and they
were the longest live uh
people in history they were had more
centenarians per capita than any other
population at the turn of the century
yeah
so
you've talked about you know one thing
that medicine really has got to start
doing is looking at the laws of biology
so yeah you know physicists are looking
at the laws of the universe what are the
laws of biology i'd love to hear what
are some of the laws of biology how does
that play out in terms of
plants because i can walk you through
it's admittedly like a lay person's
understanding but when i walk through
the notion of the plant paradox and you
start thinking of a plant as having a
basically a chemical
evolutionary advantage or the way that
they stop predators is by creating these
chemicals that either upset their
stomach or they're bad for them or their
bitter tasting or whatever it's like oh
that makes sense when you have something
it has to have a mechanism against
predation yeah and humans are one of the
predators and so okay it didn't develop
claws or whatever it developed like
these chemical signals you've talked
about food being signals yeah more than
just calories and so it's like okay well
there's actually some logic whether it's
true or not is a totally different
question but there's a followable chain
of logic to
why
plants potentially
have issues and so it's like is there
anything that they all share that
for somebody with a sensitivity they're
you know they're an issue or no no like
there's so many other nutrients in
vegetables if you're not eating them
you're kidding committing a cardinal sin
of the laws of biology well if you're
eating nose to tail like you're eating
the liver which has more vitamin c more
vitamin a than any vegetable on the
planet right
um
you know you can get by but you can get
by or it's ideal i don't think it's
ideal i mean
i think your gut
the microbiome feeds on
carbohydrates feeds on phytochemicals so
it feeds on fiber right which does
happen to your microbiome if you're only
eating
uh carnivore diet no detail it changes
but in a bad way potentially
potentially i think you know there's
there's some interesting experiments i
think we're still in the exploration of
like what happens when you eat different
diets but i have a little different view
about vegetables um and i call it
symbiotic phytoadaptation
which is a fascinating concept but
essentially
yes there are defense mechanisms in
plants that help the plants
but also can help us right so for
example we don't make
vitamin c we get it from plants
we need things to help us detoxify so
when you eat broccoli you upregulate the
glutathione the pathways of detox in
your liver through phytochemicals called
glucosinolates your microbiome loves the
polyphenols in pomegranate and cranberry
right so
i think we have evolved co-evolved with
plants so we use these
compounds these phytochemicals to
regulate all sorts of biological
functions from inflammation to our
microbiome to detoxification
to brain function neurotransmitters and
so on so on so i think
we there are plants you wouldn't eat
don't you don't eat poison mushrooms
right you don't eat fox glove which will
kill you but
there are a lot of plants that we've
evolved with that we use in our bodies
to regulate our biological functions and
i think they're really necessary
talk to me about soy i heard you say
something which i'd heard before but i
don't know something about the way you
said it that really hit me that
you see women drinking or young girls
drinking like soy milk likes going out
of style and then it it will put them
into
premiums yeah happened to my
stepdaughter you know soy milk was the
big rage and she liked to drink i mean
she was allergic to dairy so she was
like drank you know quarter soy milk a
day and she ended up like at nine years
old getting little boobs whoa and we're
like oh because it's upping her estrogen
yep so so soy soy is a very
controversial topic for many reasons
there's all the environmental issues
obviously of big mono crop fields of
tearing down rainforests in brazil of
all the consequences of climate change
and all that but
uh from a dietary perspective it's been
a staple in diets for millennia in asia
and it's always been processed in a way
that makes it more digestible tofu
tempeh right miso soy sauce those are
traditional foods when you start you
know making
soy hot dogs and soy burgers and
eating all these you know processed
things even soy milk is not something we
used to consume
it
you get one trouble with digestion two
increased risk of allergy and three you
get extra hormonal effects when you have
these massive quantities of these things
yeah thinking of food as a signaling
molecule and then the all the talk
around soy
what is the mechanism that's happening
that makes soy trigger an estrogen
response i've never understood that well
you know
all food is information not just
calories it's all information it's
instructions it's literally like code
that programs your biology with every
bite so at like an epigenetic level it's
in every level so every bite of food you
take can change your gene expression
across a whole range of genes so you eat
green you drink green tea or eat
broccoli you upregulate the gene called
glutathione is transferase that helps
you detoxify heavy metals environmental
chemicals metabolic toxins um
so so it regulates your genes it
regulates your hormones so if you lost
starch and sugar it increases insulin
lowers testosterone increases estrogen
for example uh it affects your brain
chemistry and what your hunger hormones
are your craving levels are and what
foods you you know you're attracted to
it affects your immune system it
regulates inflammation or it's
anti-inflammatory it regulates
your microbiome with every bite so every
single system of your body is regulated
by the quality of the food you eat
and when you realize
you shouldn't just focus on calories
you should focus on quality and the
information you're eating changes
everything so that's really what i have
people focus on and i think when people
do that then you have a different
relationship to your food you go well
i'm eating am i going to need toxic
information or am i going to eat healing
information
so if you were to put together a few
groups of
the sort of healing signals
what would they be like what would be if
if you were so um in investing there's
this thing called the all-weather
strategy and they say okay look uh i'm
sort of blindly talking to my
grandchildren i'm you know gonna pass
away and all i can leave behind is a
strategy that will work in in any
environment but if you had to just put
together an all-weather eating strategy
what would the
ideal in air quotes i wrote about it i
wrote a whole book about it it's called
food what the heck should i eat and it's
about
these principles like homopagan
principles it's really focused on
quality first right
nobody thinks we should be
adding
additives and hormones and abiotics and
pesticides and glyphosate to our food
like it's in it but nobody's like yeah
and we avoid it at the grocery store uh
you know if you look at the label of
something if it has something you can't
recognize pronounce
then you shouldn't have it or if you
don't have it in your cupboard at home
like
mutilated hydroxy toluene which is in
almost every processed food is bht it's
illegal in europe you wouldn't sprinkle
it on your salad would you what no no so
that's a good rule uh the second
principle is you know we should be
eating a plant-rich diet uh and and
across the spectrum from
fruits and vegetables to do you treat
fruits and vegetables as sort of one in
the same or no it should be vegetables
and fruit right so it's like we should
you don't want to be consuming only
fruit because that's full of sugar and
and if you're diabetic or you're
overweight or have issues you might want
to cut back on the sugary fruits or eat
berries which are less glycemic
um lots of nuts and seeds everybody
agrees with you being lost in nuts and
seeds you want to soak them reduce
selecting that's fine
if you're going to eat beans and grains
pick low starch ones right and and also
give us a few examples so like black
rice which is like the blueberries of
rice quinoa what does that mean well the
black rice was called the emperor's rice
or forbidden rice and it's full of these
dark it's black so anytime you see color
in nature there are polyphenols and
phytochemicals in there so it's got more
antioxidants per serving than
blueberries and then and then you want
to make sure
if you're eating you know grains like
gluten grains are are interesting so
most of the gluten we eat is is wheat
uh it's 133 pounds per person per year
that's a pharmacological dose it is
worse for your blood sugar than table
sugar
really yes
what yes when you look at the glycemic
index which is how much the fixed amount
of the food will raise your blood sugar
table sugar is
80 bread is a hundred
whoa i had no idea why
because it's so processed and so quickly
absorbed and if you want to eat like if
you're not gluten sense you won't have
pharaoh or einkorn wheat or you know
spell you might tolerate those because
those aren't highly altered genetically
but the new the wheat we eat is super
starchy has a lot more glyden proteins
create more gluten sensitivity is
sprayed with glyphosate at harvest to to
de defoliate the plants and it also has
preservative called calcium propionate
which causes autism in animal models and
is shown to cause behavioral problems in
kids
so add all that stuff could be all the
flour so i'm not a big flower person
plus it's just like sugar so if you want
to have other grains if you're not going
to say like rye or barley that's fine
and then beans again you know lime beans
kidney beans if you're if look 75
percent of americans overweight so most
people should eat a lot of starch and
that you know you have to eat three cups
of beans to get the equivalent of like
four six ounces of protein uh so i have
this lentils and things like that which
are lower starch beans tazooki beans
other kinds of beans i talk about in my
book and then if you're eating animal
products you want to eat animal products
that are not
going to hurt the animals not going to
hurt you and not going to hurt the
environment
right so for
beef it should be regenerately raised
ideally which is hard to find but you
can actually get more and more of that
around and there's ways to do it by by
looking online to get it looking thrive
market is a great resource for a
regeneratively raised beef
and again chicken should be
pasture-raised
pork and all that should be raised in
ways that are are more organic or
sustainable
fish you want to eat fish that's
sustainably harvested or you know
sustainably organically uh aquacultured
uh because we over harvest the fish and
then we don't eat big fish it's like
full of mercury and tuna and swords just
because they've lived longer well what
happens is the coal and all the fossil
fuels go in the ocean
going to algae gets stored in the algae
that the little fish eat the algae then
the little bigger fish eat the little
fish and it goes on up the food chain
and you got a swordfish or a tuna
these are monster fish and uh they've
bio-accumulated all this and so
you want to you know eat the right
animal products you want to eat the
right grains the right beans the right
vegetables the right fruit
nuts give me the right vegetables are we
just looking for color so
non-starchy vegetables if you want to
cut out nightshades and get rid of the
lectins that's fine you know i don't
care but i love tomatoes i'm not gonna
do that and they don't make me feel bad
uh so there's no point in restricting
your diet necessarily if you're not sick
right
talking really fast just because you
mentioned that you eat shades which are
problematic for a lot of people i've
heard you say that your body is the best
doctor yeah exactly so i mean you listen
and watch my stuff that's i'm impressed
so the
whole idea
is that
you can listen to all the nutritional
advice you want but
pay attention to how you feel your
body's going to tell you if you go vegan
and you stop having your period you lose
muscle you feel tired you're b12
deficient you feel like crap you develop
autoimmune diseases you gain weight
whatever
maybe it's not for you right
i mean i literally just did a whole
analysis on a very well-known celebrity
and he's a vegan and he's massively
nutritional efficient no omega-3s
extremely low vitamin d extremely low b
vitamins extremely low zinc selenium i
mean it was frightening to see in a
young guy how depleted he was
but other people it works really well
for um
and then
uh see how you feel if you get rid of
gluten and dairy do you feel better
right so i have people do a detox
essentially a dietary cleanse which get
off all the junk get off all the sugar
get off all the processed food eat whole
foods get rid of gluten and dairy even
get rid of grains and beans for a while
and see how you feel and if you don't
feel good you know try to add things
back if you feel amazing and your
autoimmune disease goes away your
digestive problems clear up your brain
fog's clear your migraines are gone
well then that's probably a sign that
your body likes that way of eating you
know walk people through really fast
your 10 day detox like what does that
entail how do they
take advantage so one of the essential
you know therapeutic approaches of
functional medicine is food is medicine
and
in that thinking one of the ways we
treat people is taking away the most
inflammatory foods
so gluten and dairy are
number one and two
for most people for a lot of reasons but
then there's
a whole host of other ones like eggs and
soy and some nuts for people
so the 10 day detox essentially is whole
foods based
it's high quality animal protein lots of
veggies
but non-starchy veggies so it's
extremely low glycemic so there's not
starch and sugar and flour
it cuts out grains cuts out beans cuts
out fruit except for berries
and it's got a lot of good fats hot
fruit except for berries just you're
trying to get well the dye is designed
to be like it's not one size fits all
but it's close because it's low glycemic
so it helps you lose weight it's
anti-inflammatory it fixes your gut
and it's highly nutrient dense and
there's lots of fiber lots of
phytochemicals lots of good fats so it's
high fat low starch in sugar so it works
for autoimmune diseases for gut issues
for weight issues for diabetes i mean i
should show you this picture of this
woman who literally had type 2 diabetes
for 10 years on insulin heart failure
kidney failure liver failure high blood
pressure tons of medications 65 years
old on her way out
she came into one of our group programs
at cleveland clinic went on a 10-day
detox
took a basic supplements like a
multivitamin fish oil vitamin e not a
lot of stuff
and within three days she was off her
insulin whoa in three months she
reversed her heart failure her kidney
failure her liver failure high blood
pressure got off all her medications
lost 43 pounds and in a year she lost
116 pounds and is off everything wow and
she saved 20 000 a year in co-pays for
her medications because insulin's so
expensive
and that was food i mean it was you know
she was seeing so many doctors she was
seeing the best in the field and they
were managing her disease and i don't
really want to manage people's disease i
want to get to the root of it and for so
many people food is really the root
what i like about that approach is that
it's a detox right so it's more about
what you're removing even than what
you're adding and and i find a lot of
times
that's interesting i want to hear more
about that because what i find a lot of
times is that people want to just add
like oh if i add uh broccoli to my
twinkie diet that i'll be fine
so what where do you think that balance
is like how much of this is a removal
how much of this is an addition
i think you know
we we have the most inflammatory diet in
the world right now
and all the diseases that people suffer
when it's gut issues diabetes cancer
alzheimer's heart disease these are all
inflammatory diseases so the foods that
we're eating 60 of our diet is
considered ultra processed food made
from corn wheat and soy most in the form
of white flour high fructose corn syrup
and trans fats or soybean oil now
and the people who eat the most of it
are the sickest and the people who eat
it for every 10
of your diet that's ultra processed
foods your risk of death goes up by 14
so we eat 60
and and so we we have to get rid of that
stuff that's destroying our biology
because it's like literally putting
poison in our body
and and our bodies don't die immediately
it's a slow long prolonged painful death
right yeah so it's taking out all that
stuff
it's taking out things that are often
inflammatory like the wheat we eat isn't
the wheat that our ancestors ate right
the dairy we eat is not the dairy that
our ancestors eat it's been highly
altered through genetic breeding the
changes of quality
the the fats the proteins
the
the allergens in there so like we used
to have heirloom cows which are you know
if you travel around the world and you
see these cows like wow that's a weird
looking cow you know like i was like i
never thought i like that because
they're all like these same cows in
america they're like white and black
holstein cows they're all bred by like
three bowls and they're pretty much
genetically the same and they have high
levels of a1 casein which is super
inflammatory
whereas heirloom cows don't or cheap and
goat also have a2 casein which is less
problematic uh wheat same thing the way
they've created the dwarf wheat they
breed the wheat for all these properties
that are drought resistant more starchy
and so forth and the guy won the nobel
prize for this but the unintended
consequences is when you breed plants
it's not like humans you get your 23
pairs of chromosomes every
every human has 46. if you are a
wheat plant and you have 46 chromosomes
and you breed with another wheat
pennsylvania you got 90 you get 92
chromosomes
right and then what that means is you're
making extra proteins because
chromosomes genes make proteins and
you're making way more gluten proteins
they're much more likely to cause celiac
which is why we've seen such an increase
in celiac disease and gluten sensitivity
that's really interesting
okay one thing i want to go back to um
is where you started and like your whole
thing around love and community and how
if you really want to make change it's
about connection and getting other
people that are around you to change
their lifestyle as well and then it
self-reinforces one walk us through like
how did you end up going so deep on
buddhist studies what did you draw from
that yeah and then as you were having
really a near-death experience but i
mean
you're in a risky place there the first
time you had that medical emergency yeah
like the peace that you had during that
whole process which i found very
interesting yeah well you know um i was
always a weird kid i always like didn't
really have any friends just read a lot
of books couldn't really relate to
anybody except grown-ups
and now then i got to college and it was
like wow and i read i read walden when i
was like 14 15
and i just like studied it like a bible
and i think that specifically is hitting
you like at 15
to encounter those ideas which would be
very run very contrary to a standard
american upbringing yeah but what
specifically we like whoa that that
right just you know i i i remember being
like three and it was feeling so much
love for everybody and just feeling in a
state of love all the time and i
remember noticing how all the grown-ups
were just so weird and why were they so
disconnected and
and i always felt that sense of love and
i think
when i began to understand what buddhism
was about it was about understanding
compassion and kindness and service and
also like wisdom you know how do we see
the world so buddhism isn't a religion
it's it's basically
a phenomenology of the mind it's a
description of how our perception works
why we suffer and how we can break down
that you know sort of in slow motion
like the matrix you know like break down
the
the uh the ways in which we get into
this suffering pattern of getting
attached to our meanings we put on
things and that creates all this misery
and suffering it's all created in our
head and i and i really was looking for
a way out of my own
suffering as a kid and it just was
really spoke to me and how does that
become
so important as you look at wellness and
think of that as as sort of a
critical pillar of actual wellness do
you talk in functional medicine when
somebody comes to see you do you talk at
all about the
need to meditate of course yeah 100
so what is that what's the connection
there what's the mind gut connection
like how does this all well like i said
before we're one system so
your brain is connected to everything
else and when you're stressed you're
dysregulating all the functions in your
body right it's fine if you're running
for a tiger but if you're stressed all
the time your gut shuts down your immune
system doesn't work
you're
you know you're constantly in a state of
vigilance and stress which is just
degrades every system in your body so
it's a huge component is both dealing
with your mindset and your way of
thinking
to sort of be able to unhook from
all the meanings we attach to things all
the perceptions we have that aren't
really true and the suffering we
self-generate and then i also
teach people tools and techniques to
help them reset right so we're we're all
stressed like i'm running around in l.a
today you know doing my tv shows and
this and that you know for my new book
but like i make sure i meditate like i
meditated this morning you know
sometimes i'll be able to squeeze in a
yoga class like i'll you know used to be
a yoga instructor i did i was a yoga
teacher before i was a doctor yeah i was
kind of weird i told you i was weird
it's it's so interesting man here's the
problem with where you're at today
functional medicine is no longer like
this alien notion but the fact that
you've had your finger on this for as
long as you have is really interesting
the fact that it was born into the mind
of somebody that was so into eastern
philosophy does not surprise me well
it's a system's view right
and and you know what is what is
you know buddhism is sort of a
description of the laws of the mind
right and so functional medicine is is a
description of the laws of biology for
we have no theory
we have theories of physics right we
have the laws of physics we can we can
build a bridge or a spaceship
based on the laws of physics right and
it works because they're natural laws
what are the natural laws of biology
there are natural laws and in medicine
we've not thought about that we were
like well this hurts so fix this you
know it's like a knee problem the knee
problem might be related to your gut
right and and how do we think about that
so so functional medicine attempts to
describe what are those natural laws
what are those essential elements so
when i i look at nutritional medicine
there's now 155 000 diseases
if you look at your code book it's
ridiculous
and it used to be twelve thousand they
sub categorize them they say you have
depression
it's just the name of the disease it
doesn't tell you the cause of the
disease so functional medicine one of
those natural causes and you can have a
few natural laws that describe an
immense number of phenomena that you see
right so that's like the laws of physics
immense number phenomena so the same
thing is true in biology
and functional medicine i think is an
attempt to codify what those natural
laws are how the body actually works how
it's connected as a web how what are the
root causes of diseases and there's not
many right stress poor diet toxins
allergens microbes and one of the things
we need to create a healthy human it's a
short list the right food nutrients
balance of hormones light air water love
meaning connection purpose those are the
things that we need
to thrive and you just take out the bad
stuff put in the good stuff and you know
miracles happen
dude that is such a powerful way to
explain all this yeah that was [__]
amazing thank you for that where can
people connect with you oh they can go
to dr hyman.com i've got a podcast a
doctor's pharmacy which is killing it i
don't know why but people love it and uh
you know
yeah
very easy to answer why people love it
it's absolutely amazing high quality as
is everything that you put out there
dude it's amazing what you're doing is
really really extraordinary i can think
of few voices that would be
able to to match yours in the space and
so the fact that you've stepped out
front and are doing all this is really
incredible and just the knock-on effect
with you getting involved in
regulation and everything i think yeah
we all gotta we all gotta save ourselves
here because nobody's coming to save us
and i think we have to understand that
that our food system is generating most
of the problems we see in the world the
chronic disease the burden on our
economy our 22 trillion dollar debt a
lot of that has to do with the food
we're eating and how it's causing
chronic diseases burdening our
government the climate change of the
results from it the environmental
degradation violence poverty injustice
malnutrition i mean it's all it just
goes on and on it's all the web
it's all connected that's the beautiful
thing it's like functional medicine when
you see how it's all connected
and not in silos you can actually fix
one thing and everything gets better
right yeah
all right if you could have people make
one change that would have the biggest
impact on their health what change would
you have them make
it's pretty simple i mean
eat
whole real food
i mean
follow the pagan diet
get my cookbook
i mean it's pretty simple i mean i i
kind of laugh because i got paid a lot
of money to tell people to eat real food
and i'm like
you know it's sort of obvious right
i think it is a very effective answer
mark thank you so much for being on the
show today thank you guys
go check out everything that he does the
books he has so many they're so good you
can literally pick them almost at random
but starting with the one that he just
released i think is a very good start
and then be sure to check out his
podcast the doctor's pharmacy with an f
it is really fantastic everything that
he does i think is incredible and is
leading everything in the right
direction if you haven't already be sure
to subscribe and until next time my
friends be legendary take care
thank you guys so much for watching and
being a part of this community if you
haven't already be sure to subscribe
you're going to get weekly videos on
building a growth mindset cultivating
grit and unlocking your full potential
you